DOC-5371 - two phase finality documentation and release notes (#1655)
corda/corda-docs-portal: content/en/platform/corda/4.11/enterprise/two-phase-finality.md

---
date: '2023-03-30T12:00:00Z'
menu:
  corda-enterprise-4-11:
    parent: corda-enterprise-4-11-cordapps-flows
tags:
- two
- phase
- finality
title: Two Phase Finality
weight: 40
---

## Introduction

Finality refers to the act of notarizing, recording, and sharing a transaction with all of its participants. Finality enables ledger consistency.

An **initiator** uses the built-in flow called `FinalityFlow` to finalize a transaction:

1. Send the transaction to the chosen notary and, if necessary, satisfy the notary that the transaction is valid.
2. Record the transaction in the local vault, if it is relevant (that is, it involves the owner of the node).
3. Send the fully signed transaction to the other participants for recording also.

One or more **receivers** use the built-in flow `ReceiveFinalityFlow` to receive and record the finalized transaction.

## Conventional implementation

Up until Corda 4.10, the finality flow protocol was implemented using a single pass transaction sharing mechanism as depicted below:

{{< figure alt="Conventional Single Phase Finality Protocol" width=100% zoom="./resources/C4-finality-conventional.png" >}}

{{< note >}}

> * Peers only receive the finalized transaction after successful notarization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Peers only received the finalized transaction after successful notarization.

```

Author: Not sure this is the right tense - the second would be used if talking about a single event in the past; I think the present conditional (sic?) works better here.

> * Recovery is only possible at the initiator side, as peers have no record of a transaction until finality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Recovery was only possible at the initiator side, as peers had no record of a transaction until finality.

```

Author: Done

> * Failure conditions may lead to ledger inconsistency, requiring manual intervention for recovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Failure conditions may have led to ledger inconsistency, requiring manual intervention for recovery.

```

Author: Done

{{< /note >}}

## Two Phase Finality (2PF)

To address the shortcomings of the conventional protocol, Two Phase Finality introduces a multi-phased protocol whereby:

* All parties have a copy of the unnotarized transaction. (Phase 1)
* Additional metadata is stored with the unnotarized transaction to aid recovery.
* All parties eventually have a copy of the notarized transaction. (Phase 2)
* Recovery is possible at both the initiator and the receiver sides.
* Failure conditions may lead to ledger inconsistency, which is recoverable using a new suite of
  [finality flow recovery tools and commands]({{< relref "finality-flow-recovery.md" >}}).

The following diagram illustrates the Two Phase Finality protocol:

{{< figure alt="Two Phase Finality Protocol" width=100% zoom="./resources/C4-finality-optimized-two-phase-finality.png" >}}

The two primary optimizations used within the protocol are:

* Usage of a *Deferred Acknowledgment* in Phase 1, where the Receiver sends back an explicit `FetchDataFlow.Request.End`
  acknowledgement to the initiator `SendTransaction` flow.

>   Note that the `ReceiverTransactionFlow` is now passed an optional parameter (`deferredAck` = true) to instruct it to not perform any final acknowledging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note that `ReceiverTransactionFlow` is now passed an optional parameter (`deferredAck` = true) to instruct it to not perform any final acknowledging.

```

Author: I think either of these work:

- Note that `ReceiverTransactionFlow` is now...
- 
- Note that the `ReceiverTransactionFlow` parameter is now ....

But not the above - what do you think?

* Implementation of an Optimistic Finalization protocol in Phase 2, where a FinalityFlow receiver of a follow-up
  transaction (with the same peer, and using a transaction derived from the same back chain as a previous unnotarized

>   transaction) will automatically mark the unnotarized transaction as final. This is based on the guarantee that the follow-up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  transaction) automatically marks the unnotarized transaction as final. This is based on the guarantee that the follow-up

```

Author: Done.

---
date: '2023-03-30T12:00:00Z'
menu:
  corda-enterprise-4-11:
    parent: corda-enterprise-4-11-cordapps-flows
tags:
- two
- phase
- finality
title: Two Phase Finality
weight: 40
---

> # Two Phase Finality

Reviewer: Necessary?

Author: Removed

## Introduction

> Finality refers to the act of notarizing, recording and sharing a transaction with all of its participants. Finality enables ledger consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finality refers to the act of notarizing, recording, and sharing a transaction with all of its participants. Finality enables ledger consistency.

```

Author: Done

> An **initiator** will use the built-in flow called `FinalityFlow` to finalize a transaction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **initiator** uses the built-in flow called `FinalityFlow` to finalize a transaction:

```

1. Send the transaction to the chosen notary and, if necessary, satisfy the notary that the transaction is valid.
2. Record the transaction in the local vault, if it is relevant (that is, it involves the owner of the node).

> 3. Send the fully signed transaction to the other participants for recording as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Send the fully signed transaction to the other participants for recording also.

```

Author: Done

> One or more **receivers** will use the built-in flow `ReceiveFinalityFlow` to receive and record the finalized transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One or more **receivers** use the built-in flow `ReceiveFinalityFlow` to receive and record the finalized transaction.

```

Author: Done

## Conventional implementation

Up until Corda 4.10, the finality flow protocol was implemented using a single pass transaction sharing mechanism as depicted below:

{{< figure alt="conventional finality protocol" width=100% zoom="./resources/C4 Finality - Conventional.png" >}}

> Note the following:

Reviewer: Note shortcode?

Author: Done

* Peers only receive the finalized transaction after successful notarization.
* Recovery is only possible at the initiator side, as peers have no record of a transaction until finality.
* Failure conditions may lead to ledger inconsistency, requiring manual intervention for recovery.

## Two Phase Finality (2PF)

> To address the shortcomings of the conventional protocol, from Corda 4.11 on, Two Phase Finality introduces a multi-phased protocol whereby:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the shortcomings of the conventional protocol, Two Phase Finality introduces a multi-phased protocol whereby:

```

Author: Done

* All parties have a copy of the unnotarized transaction. (Phase 1)
* Additional metadata is stored with the unnotarized transaction to aid recovery.
* All parties eventually have a copy of the notarized transaction. (Phase 2)
* Recovery is possible at both the initiator and the receiver sides.
* Failure conditions may lead to ledger inconsistency, which is recoverable using a new suite of
  [finality flow recovery tools and commands]({{< relref "finality-flow-recovery.md" >}}).

The following diagram illustrates the new protocol:

> {{< figure alt="conventional finality protocol" width=100% zoom="./resources/C4 Finality - Optimised 2Phase Finality.png" >}}

Reviewer: Probably shouldn't have space in file names?

The two primary optimizations used within the protocol are:

* Usage of a *Deferred Acknowledgement* in Phase 1, where the Receiver sends back an explicit `FetchDataFlow.Request.End`
  acknowledgement to the initiator `SendTransaction` flow.

>   Note that the `ReceiverTransactionFlow` is now passed an optional parameter (`deferredAck` = true) to tell it to not perform any final acknowledging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note that the `ReceiverTransactionFlow` is now passed an optional parameter (`deferredAck` = true) to instruct it to not perform any final acknowledging.

```
